@node VTY shell
@chapter VTY shell

@menu
* Integrated configuration mode::
@end menu

@command{vtysh} provides a combined frontend to all Quagga daemons in a
single combined session.  It is enabled by default at build time, but can
be disabled through the @option{--disable-vtysh} option to
@command{./configure}.

@command{vtysh} has a configuration file, @file{vtysh.conf}.  The location
of that file cannot be changed from @file{@value{INSTALL_PREFIX_ETC}} since
it contains options controlling authentication behavior.  This file will
also not be written by configuration-save commands, it is intended to be
updated manually by an administrator with an external editor.

@quotation Warning
This also means the @command{hostname} and @command{banner motd} commands
(which both do have effect for vtysh) need to be manually updated in
@file{vtysh.conf}.
@end quotation

@section Permissions and setup requirements

@command{vtysh} connects to running daemons through Unix sockets located in
@file{@value{INSTALL_PREFIX_STATE}}.  Running vtysh thus requires access to
that directory, plus membership in the @emph{@value{INSTALL_VTY_GROUP}}
group (which is the group that the daemons will change ownership of their
sockets to).

To restrict access to Quagga configuration, make sure no unauthorized users
are members of the @emph{@value{INSTALL_VTY_GROUP}} group.

@subsection PAM support (experimental)

vtysh has working (but rather useless) PAM support.  It will perform
an "authenticate" PAM call using @emph{@value{PACKAGE_NAME}} as service
name. No other (accounting, session, password change) calls will be
performed by vtysh.

Users using vtysh still need to have appropriate access to the daemons'
VTY sockets, usually by being member of the @emph{@value{INSTALL_VTY_GROUP}}
group.  If they have this membership, PAM support is useless since they can
connect to daemons and issue commands using some other tool.  Alternatively,
the @command{vtysh} binary could be made SGID (set group ID) to the
@emph{@value{INSTALL_VTY_GROUP}} group.  @strong{No security guarantees are
made for this configuration}.

@deffn {Command} {username @var{username} nopassword} {}

If PAM support is enabled at build-time, this command allows disabling the
use of PAM on a per-user basis.  If vtysh finds that an user is trying to
use vtysh and a "nopassword" entry is found, no calls to PAM will be made
at all.

@end deffn

@node Integrated configuration mode
@section Integrated configuration mode

Integrated configuration mode uses a single configuration file,
@file{Quagga.conf}, for all daemons.  This replaces the individual files like
@file{zebra.conf} or @file{bgpd.conf}.

@file{Quagga.conf} is located in @file{@value{INSTALL_PREFIX_ETC}}.  All
daemons check for the existence of this file at startup, and if it exists
will not load their individual configuration files.  Instead,
@command{vtysh -b} must be invoked to process @file{Quagga.conf} and apply
its settings to the individual daemons.

@quotation Warning
@command{vtysh -b} must also be executed after restarting any daemon.
@end quotation

@subsection Configuration saving, file ownership and permissions

The @file{Quagga.conf} file is not written by any of the daemons; instead
@command{vtysh} contains the neccessary logic to collect configuration from
all of the daemons, combine it and write it out.

@quotation Warning
Daemons must be running for @command{vtysh} to be able to collect their
configuration.  Any configuration from non-running daemons is permanently
lost after doing a configuration save.
@end quotation

Since the @command{vtysh} command may be running as ordinary user on the
system, configuration writes will be tried through @command{watchquagga},
using the @command{write integrated} command internally.  Since
@command{watchquagga} is running as superuser, @command{vtysh} is able to
ensure correct ownership and permissions on @file{Quagga.conf}.

If @command{watchquagga} is not running or the configuration write fails,
@command{vtysh} will attempt to directly write to the file.  This is likely
to fail if running as unprivileged user;  alternatively it may leave the
file with incorrect owner or permissions.

Writing the configuration can be triggered directly by invoking
@command{vtysh -w}.  This may be useful for scripting.  Note this command
should be run as either the superuser or the Quagga user.

We recommend you do not mix the use of the two types of files. Further, it
is better not to use the integrated Quagga.conf file, as any syntax error in
it can lead to /all/ of your daemons being unable to start up. Per daemon
files are more robust as impact of errors in configuration are limited to
the daemon in whose file the error is made.

@deffn {Command} {service integrated-vtysh-config} {}
@deffnx {Command} {no service integrated-vtysh-config} {}

Control whether integrated @file{Quagga.conf} file is written when
'write file' is issued.

These commands need to be placed in @file{vtysh.conf} to have any effect.
Note that since @file{vtysh.conf} is not written by Quagga itself, they
therefore need to be manually placed in that file.

This command has 3 states:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@command{service integrated-vtysh-config}

@command{vtysh} will always write @file{Quagga.conf}.

@item
@command{no service integrated-vtysh-config}

@command{vtysh} will never write @file{Quagga.conf}; instead it will ask
daemons to write their individual configuration files.

@item
Neither option present (default)

@command{vtysh} will check whether @file{Quagga.conf} exists.  If it does,
configuration writes will update that file.  Otherwise, writes are performed
through the individual daemons.
@end itemize

This command is primarily intended for packaging/distribution purposes, to
preset one of the two operating modes and ensure consistent operation across
installations.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {write integrated} {}

Unconditionally (regardless of @command{service integrated-vtysh-config}
setting) write out integrated @file{Quagga.conf} file through
@command{watchquagga}.  If @command{watchquagga} is not running, this command
is unavailable.

@end deffn

@section Caveats

Configuration changes made while some daemon is not running will be invisible
to that daemon.  The daemon will start up with its saved configuration
(either in its individual configuration file, or in @file{Quagga.conf}).
This is particularly troublesome for route-maps and prefix lists, which would
otherwise be synchronized between daemons.
