.TH VTYSH 1 "3 October 2004" "Quagga VTY shell" "Version 0.96.5"
.SH NAME
vtysh \- a integrated shell for Quagga routing software
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vtysh
[
.B \-b
]
.br
.B vtysh
[
.B \-c
.I command
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vtysh
is a integrated shell for
.B Quagga
routing engine.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available for the
.B vtysh
command:
.IP "\fB\-b, \-\-boot\fP"
Execute boot startup configuration. It makes sense only if integrated config
file is in use (not default in Quagga). See Info file \fBQuagga\fR for more
info.
.IP "\fB\-c, \-\-command \fIcommand\fP"
Specify command to be executed under batch mode. It behaves like -c option in
any other shell -
.I command
is executed and vtysh exits.

It's useful for gathering info from Quagga routing software from shell scripts
etc.
.IP "\fB\-e, \-\-execute \fIcommand\fP"
Alias for -c. It's here only for compatibility with Zebra routing software and
older Quagga versions. This will be removed in future.
.IP "\fB\-h, \-\-help\fP"
Display a usage message on standard output and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.IP "\fBVTYSH_PAGER\fR"
This should be the name of the pager to use. Default is \fBmore\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/vtysh.conf
The default location of the 
.B vtysh
config file.
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/Quagga.conf
The default location of the integrated Quagga routing engine config file
if integrated config file is in use (not default).
.SH WARNING
This man page is intended to be a quick reference for command line
options. The definitive document is the Info file \fBQuagga\fR.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR bgpd (8),
.BR ripd (8),
.BR ripngd (8),
.BR ospfd (8),
.BR ospf6d (8),
.BR isisd (8),
.BR zebra (8)
.SH BUGS
Running the command which outputs large amount of data through pager ("show ip
ospf database", "show ip bgp" etc. in big networks) will cause daemon to be
unresponsive until vtysh returns back to the prompt.

.B vtysh
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI http://bugzilla.quagga.net
.SH AUTHORS
See
.BI http://www.zebra.org
and
.BI http://www.quagga.org
or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

